NBC Moves Struggling ‘Smash’ to Saturday Slot

NBC’s ambitious effort to turn the creation of a Broadway musical into a television drama essentially ended Wednesday when the network announced it will move “Smash” to Saturday nights to play out the remainder of its second season.

The move is set for April 6, and it means the show’s final batch of episodes will play in obscurity, because Saturday night is now where networks send failing shows to die.

NBC announced a series of schedule moves Wednesday, which basically centered on the abandoned hope that “Smash” might turn around what has been an abysmal ratings performance since it returned for its second season, as well as NBC’s belief that it may have a promising new reality series in the dating show “Ready for Love.”

NBC announced that show will inherit the old slot on Tuesdays occupied by “Smash,” with two-hour episodes that will follow the network’s one pillar of strength, the singing competition, “The Voice.”

Starting April 9, “Ready for Love,” which several NBC executives praised this week as having potential to capture the female audience that loved “The Bachelor” on ABC this winter, will move to Tuesdays.

NBC had hoped that “Smash” might recover from a rocky end to its first season, which was undone, after a promising start, by plotlines and writing widely disparaged by critics.

When the show began last year those critics were strongly in its corner, praising NBC for the original idea of building a series about the creative process of conceiving an original musical. But the show seemed to abandon that idea and instead deteriorated into soapy plots that undermined the strength of the original songs composed for the show.

This season NBC brought in a new creative team and some big-name talent, including Jennifer Hudson and the Broadway star Jeremy Jordan (“Newsies”). But viewers never gave the revamped version a chance. The audience from the first episode of the new season was down drastically, and declined from there. This week’s episode drew fewer than 3 million viewers.

“Smash” was also a highly expensive show, with a cost of about $4.2 million an episode. All 17 of the ordered episodes were produced, meaning NBC had more than $70 million invested in a show that had little audience support. And that expense came on top of one of the most expensive promotion campaigns in recent memory for the first season of a show.
