Fidelity And BlackRock Fire A Broadside At Vanguard and Schwab

This morning Fidelity announced that it was forming a strategic partners with ETF and asset management giant BlackRock which aimed directly at its arch rivals Vanguard and Schwab. [Click here for Fidelity’s press release.] It’s also an attempt to stem the flow of assets out of its mutual funds. Equity mutual funds saw outflows in 2012 in every month but one. Fidelity is one of the biggest equity mutual fund managers in the business.

Today’s announcement signals a significant shift toward not only offering more lower cost iShares ETFs,  but to partnering with iShares to build Fidelity branded ETFs. The new additions to the commission-free iShares ETF lineup include commodity ETFs (from gold and silver to agriculture) – filling the commodity gap in their lineup was no doubt driven by both investor and advisor interest in and demand for such.

Other ‘specialty’ ETFs, as well as more broad market based ETFs join the commission free lineup in what looks like a bid to defend marketshare as much as gain it.. While ETFS can play a compelling role in any investor’s portfolio, it is interesting to see that Fidelity is using this new alliance with iShares to create passive ETFs – particularly (though as yet unseen) passive sector ETFs – while calling out the fact that they are true believers in their actively managed Select sector funds. I continue to think that actively managed sector ETFs would be a huge win for Fidelity and its shareholders, but it looks like they have chosen at this juncture to ship their “commodities” to the iShares manufacturer to get products on the shelves as fast as they can.

The news comes at a time when the fund industry continues to struggle with outflows to the ETF industry. One firm, Vanguard, seems to have figured out the way to compete well, although the ETF business comes with extraordinary low fee bottom line business concerns that have to be managed well if being in the ETF business is going to be profitable.

Fidelity’s decision looks like it will be able to compete more broadly against not just its ETF competitors but against its fund competitors like Vanguard – but getting its own products and brand built into the ETFs, while key to Fidelity’s ETF business success, will take time.

So is this merely a desperate act by a financial giant after having missed the ETF boat?

While I  would’nt go so far as to call it desperate I would call it an attempt take others’ broadsides. If you’re going to go to a battle ship party, you’d better bring a battleship. Fidelity’s lineup enables them to return the broadsides launched by both Schwab and Vanguard and others – while safeguarding their brand and their ability to build better satellite solutions through Select Co. This is clear a giant step – but still just a step toward becoming a true captain of the industry  … given that Fidelity missed the first boat, they had to build their own to compete.
