Dwyane Wade: 'It's either championship or bust for us'

In the midst of the Miami Heat's 19-game winning streak, Dwyane Wade isn't stopping to get sentimental. Despite clinching a playoff berth in early March, the star guard heads into Wednesday night's game at the Philadelphia 76ers with his focus still squared on June.

"What we do in the regular season is just positioning ourselves for the playoffs," Wade told USA TODAY Sports. "It's great and one day when you're done playing the game you can look back and become a part of history. We don't really get too high over what happens in the regular season. We're a team that's built to compete for a championship. It's either championship or bust for us. We have a goal, we have a vision so we're enjoying this process. We come in every day to work because we know we have something greater in mind."

2 HYPE: LeBron James gave his sons Kid N Play haircuts

While he might not be appreciating his team's current moment on the court, Wade is constantly making a conscious effort to do the opposite as a father. It's something he's trying to highlight in a new ad campaign for Dove Men+Care, which features the 31-year-old horsing around with his two sons, Zion and Zaire. Wade is one of a current era of NBA stars, including LeBron James and Chris Paul, who have made a point of showcasing their commitment to fatherhood, frequently bringing their sons around for postgame conferences and other team activities.

"We think our kids are awesome," Wade said. "The biggest thing is we love the responsibilities of being dads. All of us are friends away from the game of basketball. You don't become friends without someone having similar values that you have. We all have that where we understand that family is the most important thing in our lives."

"Our kids are our worlds and they're the future of what we're creating now. It's great that we're able to share these moments with them. Social media helps with that. I feel so many players before us had kids around as parents in the NBA but it wasn't seen as much. We're continuing to show no matter how busy you are or where you are in life you're always focused on what's most important. For us it's our families."

It's something Wade, who won a highly publicized custody case several years ago, says he picked up from his dad Dwyane Sr., who currently oversees a foundation aimed to help men become better fathers.

"My father was there when I needed him to be and when I needed a role model or someone to be tough on me," Wade said. "When I needed someone to teach me the game of basketball he was the one who did that for me. That plays a big role in how I approach life as well. I give him credit, early in my life I didn't understand but once I became a dad I understood why he had to be so tough on us and why he did the things he did. I appreciate him for stepping up and being the father that I needed at the time."

Another person who played a key role in Wade's formation was current Indiana University head basketball coach Tom Crean, who held the same role at Marquette when Wade was there. Will that cause any mixed rooting interests should his alma mater face his former coach's team at some point this month?

"I'm happy that I'm able to root for two teams," Wade said. "Obviously I'm Marquette through and through in my heart, but Coach Crean is a father figure to me. Wherever he goes I go in heart as well. I became a part of that (Indiana)program in heart as well."

While the NCAA tournament will minimize the Heat's national TV presence for a few weeks, Wade will be front and center (along with similar ads featuring ESPN analyst Jay Bilas) during March Madness as the commercials will be heavily aired during the CBS/Turner broadcasts.
