Follow NFL free-agency news, rumors

 Free-agent running back Reggie Bush is heading to Detroit after agreeing to contract terms with the Lions, Profootballtalk.com first reported. The team’s web site announced that Bush is signing a four-year deal.

Bush, 28, averaged 1,036 rushing yards in his two seasons with the Dolphins. He also is a pass-catching threat out of the backfield who will likely supplant Mikel Leshoure as Detroit’s starting running back.

Bush wasn’t heavily courted to return by the Dolphins, which are prepared to start 2012 fourth-round draft pick Lamar Miller at running back with Daniel Thomas currently serving as his backup. Read more -- Alex Marvez
Browns sign LB Groves -- 1:05 p.m. ET

The Cleveland Browns continued a spending spree to upgrade their defense in free agency, signing former Arizona linebacker Quentin Groves to a two-year, $2.8 million contract on Wednesday.

Groves is the third defensive player signed already by the Browns, who agreed to terms with linebacker Paul Kruger and lineman Desmond Bryant on Tuesday. The Browns entered free agency $47.4 million under the salary cap and have so far been among the NFL's most aggressive teams.

The team guaranteed $21 million to Kruger, Baltimore's sacks leader last season, and dished out another $15 million in guaranteed money to Bryant, who had a career-high 48 tackles and four sacks for the Raiders in 2012.

The Browns made upgrading their pass rush a priority. They are switching from a 4-3 to a 3-4 multi-front defensive scheme this season under new coordinator Ray Horton. -- AP
Lions sign DL Jones -- 12:26 p.m. ET

The Detroit Lions signed versatile veteran defensive lineman Jason Jones on Tuesday. The move, first announced by his agent Mike McCartney on Twitter, brings the former-second round pick back to his home city of Detroit.

A former second-round pick of the Tennessee Titans, Jones signed with the Seattle Seahawks as a free agent last year. A pass-rushing defensive tackle, used prominently in third-down situations, he had three sacks in 12 games. He was placed on the Injured Reserve list after a knee injury.

Jones played for Lions head coach Jim Schwartz in Tennessee. The agreement in Detroit is a three-year deal. -- Peter Schrager<
Jags ax Robinson after one season -- 11:45 a.m. ET

Last March, the Jacksonville Jaguars raised a lot of eyebrows by inking former Dallas Cowboys wide receiver Laurent Robinson to a lucrative 5-year, $32.5 million deal. On Wednesday, the Jaguars made news by releasing Robinson after just one season. He’d passed a physical earlier this off-season, so this move was not injury related.

Robinson's release was first reported by Ryan O’Halloran of The Florida Times-Union.

Robinson played in just 7 games and caught 25 balls in 2012. With the emergence of young wide receivers Justin Blackmon and Cecil Shorts III down the stretch, he became expendable.

The Jaguars are under new leadership, with first-year General Manager David Caldwell and first-year head coach Gus Bradley taking over in January. Robinson, still just 27-years-old, caught 54 passes and scored 11 touchdowns with the Cowboys in 2011. Like last year at this time, he’s now a free agent on the market, again. -- Peter Schrager
 
Lawson to Buffalo -- 11:10 a.m. ET

A day after the Buffalo Bills released their starting quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick and saw star offensive guard Andy Levitre ink a deal with the Tennessee Titans, the team signed former Bengals outside linebacker Manny Lawson to a 4-year deal.

Lawson, a former first round pick of the San Francisco 49ers, played in all 16 games in 2012, recording 39 tackles and 2 sacks. A teammate of Buffalo Bills defensive end Mario Williams at North Carolina State, Lawson will play linebacker for a Bills team that’s already lost veteran Shawne Merriman this off-season. Lawson was expected to leave Cincinnati after signing two consecutive one-year deals. Lawson's an 8-year veteran.

Lawson’s agents, Schwartz and Feinsod, announced Lawson’s signing on Twitter Wednesday morning. -- Peter Schrager
Steelers sign Gradkowski -- 11:05 a.m. ET

Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger has a new backup.

Bruce Gradkowski is leaving Cincinnati for a three-year contract with the Steelers, ESPN reported.

A Pittsburgh native, the 30-year-old Gradkowski threw 18 passes the past two seasons as a reserve behind starter Andy Dalton. Gradkowski is believed to fit better in a Steelers offense that now emphasizes the short passing game than predecessor Byron Leftwich, who is an unrestricted free agent.

Gradkowski also has played with Tampa Bay, Cleveland and Oakland during his seven-year NFL career. While he hasn’t started a game since 2010, Gradkowski may very well get that shot this season based upon Roethlisberger’s injury history. Roethlisberger was sidelined for at least one start in seven of the past eight seasons.

The Bengals are likely in the market for a new backup quarterback. The only other passer on the roster is Zac Robinson, a third-year journeyman who has never appeared in an NFL game. -- Alex Marvez
 
Super Bowl champs shed another veteran — 10:45 a.m. ET

Another member from the defending Super Bowl champions will be playing elsewhere in 2013.

Baltimore Ravens strong safety Bernard Pollard announced on his Twitter account (@Crushboy31) that he is being released.

“Well Raven Nation it's been fun,” Pollard wrote. “My time in Baltimore is done... Thank you!”

The hard-hitting Pollard started 26 of 32 games since joining the Ravens in 2011. Pollard, 28, was set to collect a $500,000 roster bonus Friday and earn a $2.5 million base salary this season.

Two other Ravens defenders – linebackers Dannell Ellerbe (Miami) and Paul Kruger (Cleveland) – signed lucrative free-agent contracts elsewhere on Tuesday when the NFL signing period opened. The Ravens also traded wide receiver Anquan Boldin to San Francisco for a sixth-round draft pick and had center Matt Birk retire.

Free safety Ed Reed, left tackle Bryant McKinnie and cornerback Cary Williams are three more prominent Ravens free agents who remain unsigned.

— Alex Marvez
 
Lions bringing Houston back — 10:37 a.m. ET

The Detroit Lions are re-signing one of their own top free agents while courting one of the top offensive talents available on the market.

Cornerback Chris Houston will be returning to the Lions with a new multiyear contract, his agents Neil Schwartz and Jonathan Feinsod announced on Twitter (@schwartzfeinsod). Financial terms of the contract weren’t immediately available.

The Lions also are courting Miami Dolphins running back Reggie Bush on a free-agent visit Thursday at team headquarters.

Houston, 28, had three disappointing seasons in Atlanta before being traded to Detroit in 2010. Houston showed marked improvement over the past three seasons and started 42 games.

Bush, 28, averaged 1,036 rushing yards in his two seasons with the Dolphins. He also is a pass-catching threat out of the backfield who would likely supplant Mikel Leshoure as Detroit’s starting running back if signed.

Bush isn’t being heavily courted to re-sign by the Dolphins, which are prepared to start 2012 fourth-round draft pick Lamar Miller at running back with Daniel Thomas currently serving as his backup.
