TREASURIES-U.S. prices ease on stronger February retail sales


 February U.S. retail sales post largest rise since Sept.
    * Fed buys $1.464 billion in longer-dated Treasuries
    * U.S. Treasury to auction $21 bln of reopened 10-year notes

    By Chris Reese
    NEW YORK, March 13 (Reuters) - U.S. Treasury debt prices
fell on Wednesday after stronger-than-expected retail sales in
February added to evidence of a resilient economic recovery
despite higher taxes and the specter of government spending
cuts.
    The rise in February retail sales, the largest since
September, followed Friday's report of robust jobs growth.
    Analysts had been questioning whether the end of a temporary
payroll tax reduction earlier this year and worries over the
impact of automatic government spending cuts beginning March 1
might crimp consumption.
    The Commerce Department said on Wednesday that retail sales
increased 1.1 percent last month, after a revised 0.2 percent
gain in January. Economists polled by Reuters had expected
retail sales to rise 0.5 percent. 
    "The positive tone in this report is quite encouraging as it
comes at a time when U.S. households are being buffeted by
higher personal taxes and rising energy prices, and the positive
momentum in spending is indicative of continued resiliency in
consumer spending," said Millan Mulraine, fixed income
strategist at TD Securities in New York.
    The positive news for the economy worked against Treasuries,
a traditional safe-haven investment. Benchmark 10-year Treasury
notes traded 7/32 lower in price with their yield at
2.044 percent, up from 2.019 percent late Tuesday, while 30-year
bonds traded 12/32 lower to yield 3.236 percent from
3.216 percent. 
    Still, losses were limited with Treasuries prices
underpinned by the Federal Reserve's latest economic stimulus
program of buying $85 billion of mortgage-backed securities and
U.S. government debt per month.
    Some analysts say recent comments from Fed Chairman Ben
Bernanke point to the U.S. central bank continuing its debt
purchases through at least the end of 2013.
    "With Bernanke reconfirming the Fed's commitment to
(quantitative easing), we see the belly of the curve well
supported and it is trading cheap," Nomura Securities said in a
note to clients.
    As part of its latest stimulus program, the Fed on Wednesday
bought $1.464 billion of Treasuries maturing February 2036
through February 2043. 
    The focus on Wednesday will turn to the Treasury's sale of
$21 billion of reopened 10-year notes, which could benefit from
the backup in yields. The Treasury's $32 billion auction of
three-year notes on Tuesday was well received and easily
absorbed.
    In the when-issued market, considered a proxy for where the
notes will price at auction, 10-year notes were
yielding near 2.046 percent.
